# Why?

It's easy to stand after many a documentation PR and a ton of discussions and ask: why do we both writing design docs for all these pointless things?
Maybe you had a bad experience or a drawn-out review kicked your spirit, and the value of these things became clouded to you.

The reality of development is that, unless you are running the project, you will likely not persist to see the summative lifespan of a given fork.
Everyone is taking the slow path from dust back to dust again, and your intersection with the game may only be brief.
However, the changes made and the things developed have the potential to not only exist far past yourself, but to mutate as well.

I wanted to write this preface to give some reasoning for hours spent and keys tapped, so that you can understand the value in this documentation and why it's important to me.

> *"If you forget a good idea, you want to commit suicide. So you have to write them down."*
>
> -- David Lynch

## Drawing Sparks

Ideas are a product rapidly generated by basically everybody on a project at any time of the day.
Anyone from bottom to top is capable of producing meaningful thought that could realistically be transformed into genuine mechanics in the game itself.
However, the conditions which are conducive to the production of ideas are not conducive to the production of plans.

The moment a discussion concludes and the idea generated exists in some sort of finalized form, it's already begun to decay.
While you can make issues on GitHub or pen large write-ups in Discord, these are not mediums with real longevity: they are ultimately beholden to the flow of conversation and interaction between others.
This is, in fact, a highly undesirable property.

Completely divorced from realistic goals of implementation, the ideas that should become realized should be catalogued and frozen, to save them from decay.
That is the real purpose of a design document.
The shield of having a true canon is something that cannot be understated.

## Yelling Across Years

Once you've prevented your idea from rot on the scale of months, you now are going to have to shield it from a more existential threat.
A common issue with open-source game development is that the meaning and desire behind changes can very easily be lost to time.
A PR description or issue can quickly become difficult to find, irrelevant, or outdated and lacking relevance to the present state of the project.

The value in writing documentation in a central location is that this intention can be preserved somewhere where it can be easily searched for and found.
In general, you _want_ people to be able to immediately reference, read, and deeply understand the reasoning behind decisions.

Now an important factor to note is that these ideas aren't carved in stone.
Just because a document is written to last a long time does not mean it'll pass through that time unchanged.
But, this is precisely why they must be maintained and stored in a central location!
As people make decisions about how things should be, they are not only forced to update documentation on how they should function, but reckon with the past of how they once were.

In a sense, we must force people to encounter and understand the past so that the changes made may fall in line harmoniously with it, lest development fracture into distinct "eras" driven by fancy.

## What's in a Document

I think it's also important to define _what_ a design document is and why it should be written.

Lots of people write documents as shopping lists: a list of features which in combination compromise some kind of imagined feature.
This, however, is pretty much a failure of a design doc and only a success as a bullet list to check off with each PR merged.

When you are writing a design doc, the elements you want to focus on are interactions: how different bits of the game collide and make _gameplay_ occur.
Don't stop at describing **what** the player is doing, describe how other players **respond** and how the world **reacts**.
The game is not single-player: the effect on others is equally (if not more) important to the effects on the primary player.

What you _really_ want out of a design document is a self-replicating blueprint.
You want to not only lay out the design of how your given mechanic should work, but also how it is compromised and assembled, so that people in the future can observe and build on top of that information.

Something of note is that, since your design is a series of interactions and expected outcomes between players and mechanics, it is perfectly logical to leave the details of **features** up to whoever codes or implements the design.
In this scenario, there is a distinction made between the **mechanics** of the game (overarching systems and objects of the game itself) and **features** (the realization of the intersections between systems).
Your document which outlines how an antagonist will function does not need to specify every single possible feature that can be extrapolated from the basic design.

If anything, it is best to leave these things as the realm of exploration and field-testing.
Any feature that has merit (_read: is consistent with base design principles and the outlined design_) should be given the opportunity to be tested and observed in a natural game environment.
Once you have the guidelines of design and intention, you are free to open up more wild experiemntation, as there are now bounds to explore and push.

## Coder Versus Reality

Or: _No plan survives contact with the enemy. unfortunately, your enemy is the real world_

After you've penned your shining joy of a design doc, toiled away for many months implementing it, and finally completed your magnum opus: you may be faced with a terrifying reality.
It just might not be good.

Even the best writing may not be perfectly accurate in capturing every element of the game.
Bugs and coding issues aside, there may just be underlying factors and game design elements that were not considered.
Even worse, it may just **not work** for some ineffable reason!

The fact of the matter is that the game is in fact a _thing_ that exists in the real world.
Your intent and the reality of the matter are two separate things, but they should certainly be hand in hand getting sloppy with their tongues.
Supplement what you do not understand with what you can see with your eyes.
Observe gameplay, gather information, and derive conclusions.
Is something _really good_ on paper but has middling adoption?
Perhaps the item isn't providing anything useful, is too obscure, or too cumbersome to utilize.

The designs you are creating must not only contend with reality, but bend to it.
You are not carving stone, but digging channels on the beach.
As water flows through them and carves new forms, you have to respond accordingly and adjust.
And this means (I say this with both hands gripping your (YES, YOU!) face deeply) you must adopt an iterative process with design **and documentation.**

```admonish danger
I say this with love in my heart but daggers in my eyes: some people get far too comfortable designing from a point that is completely disconnected from the game.
This is obviously necessary in some cases (you should be designing *before* the feature exists, to start) but it's not something to make a habit.
If issues arise in testing from a new element, you should either be deciding how to change A) the new element or B) some other part of the game.

Something which you think works in practice does not overrule the practical results of what is occuring in game.
Reality is the master and will gladly make you its bitch.
Your goal is not to write the best theory but rather to create the best design.

Don't get overconfident.
```
