# Acolyte

{{#template ../../templates/unimplemented.md}}

Acolytes are the guardians of the station's local temple, specially suited to bargain with the spirits of the station, which is to say the stagehands, to use their '<span class="es-unimplemented">possession</span> abilities for the good of the crew.
Acolytes can collect the ectoplasm created by the use those abilities and funnel it into various uses. This combination of abilities incentivizes Acolytes to execute their gameplay by actively roleplaying as a spiritual figure, doing rituals and other acts to draw the attention of stagehands and bargaining for the ectoplasm they need.

## Acolyte Rituals

Acolytes have a few important items to make their job easier. First, they have Amphorae which can scoop up ectoplasm. Ectoplasm is invisible to most crew members with their normal vision, but Acolytes have an innate ability to see ectoplasm that others don't. Once ectoplasm is scooped up into an Amphorae, anyone can use it, allowing other crew to act as couriers, or simply steal it.
This resource can be spent at a few locations on the ship. Primarily, inserting it into the Warp Drive can either speed up charging slightly, or reverse the charge state slightly, making it highly valuable. The temple also has a Sarcophagus room, which can provide a extra chance at life by cloning one linked crew member at their point of death, but the cost of fueling this machine is a great deal of ectoplasm. Anyone can break in and change the link to themselves, gaining an extra life to do whatever they want. The sarcophagus also has a second, darker purpose. Restrained crew members can be forced inside it and slowly drained of ectoplasm, leading to a grizzly death and causing their dead body to appear as a dead [cryohusk](../../cryohusks.md), sapped of vitality and imbued with a permanent ghostly chill. Both the cloning and the sacrifice functionality only work once per round.

In order to help bargain with the spirits, Acolytes can use an Altar in the temple to send an announcement to the stagehands, with a hefty but individual for each acolyte cooldown between uses. This can be used to try to coax them to the Temple to watch a performance you want to put on, tell them your evil plans, or beg them to give you a sign to answer your burning questions about the goings on in the round. Even winding them up may be useful if it gets a few boos and thus some ectoplasm to utilize. One has to be initiated to use the Altar, those who have not been initiated simply do not have any ability to commune with the spirits in this way, unlike using filled Amporae or messing with the Sarcophagus.

While Acolytes may seem to have a monopoly on the use of ectoplasm, the uninitiated can be initiated into the first rank of Acolytes of religion by ritual. Performing a bizarre set of steps, randomized each round, transforms someone into a Acolyte and allows them to use the Altar and see ectoplasm.
To encourage the spread of their beliefs, Acolytes have a job goal to convert a small number of crew each round to their ways. Possible steps might include drinking a large ammount of a specific reagent, sacrificing a specific pest with a ritual dagger, eating a certain food item, speaking a cryptic phrase, taking a certain ammount of a type of damage, or other strange things. So long as each step is done in order, within a short timeframe, completing the last step will give you the power the other Acolytes have.

## The Temple & The Faith

The Temple is the area on the station which the Acolytes congregate. Not quite a department, it is important it has a reasonable number of toys to perform for stagehands, and is moody and mystical rather than just a bland church with pews. These toys should be repurposeable in a pinch - hitting someone with a censer is funny, or using lit bundles of incense to create a small smokescreen to escape. Aesthetically, Mystery Cult should be the feeling here, and indeed keeping the deeper rituls that are randomzied each round a secret prevents others from performing them without your input to gain the same powers. While the main body of the temple is a public area anyone can walk through, these initiations should occur only in the back rooms, away from prying eyes.
The temple has two back rooms, one for the Sarcophagus, and one which is a living quarters for the Acolytes with their lockers and supplies.
Ideally for the Acolytes, the temple is located nearby to or is connected tot the Warp Core, which serves as somewhat of an object of their attention and worship, though secondary to the spirits governing the world.

Regarding the actual rules of the faith, it is important to be more free-form and silly than strict here. The more concrete rules there are, the less that the majority of people picking this job for the fun parts will be able to follow them. Despite that some books should be available in the temple that go over some of the beliefs of the faith and tie the beliefs into the rest of the world.
These beliefs can tie into the gameplay of the Acolyte by being a bit meta and leaning into the meta parts of Ephemeral Space a bit. "The universe is one giant stage, and everyone is a player, putting on a performance for the higher powers above. The Warp Core is that which has ascended, and it is blessed for it passes through the routes backstage, and brings us through those passages into unknowable concepts beyond our reckoning that we may be blessed with a glimpse at grander designs. The spirits work in mysterious ways, twisting our fates to their whims and writing our stories as we play our parts in their grand design. In our humble lives, we can only hope to put on a grand enough performance to please them and be worthy enough to play for them once more the next act of the cosmic story."
This vague meta religion gives Acolytes some leeway to describe what they're actually doing, but still somewhat obfuscates the game part behind a greater belief in divine plays and pleasing an audience of spirits. In universe, it isn't too unusual, the belief that all of the world is a stage and that spirits are everywhere always watching over us have been repeated before many times.

## Gameplay

While unassumingly simple the gameplay of Acolytes takes them in all sorts of different directions and offers a lot of decision making and vectors for interesting narrative moments in a round.
One of the first decisions is deciding between remaining in the temple to guard the warp core and sarcophagus, planning out grand displays of faith to try to scoop up pity ecto, or traveling the station to follow the action or scrounge reported sites of activity for residual ectoplasm.
The second is the complexities around recruiting someone. Being able to trust them is very important, given how other organizations can use ectoplasm they collect to prevent the crew from escaping before they finish their goals, or gain an extra life, particularly dangerous if you recruit a worm by mistake. On the other hand, recruiting a boring safe person like a VIP might be a poor way of collecting ectoplasm compared to trying to recruit someone who is highly interesting to stagehands.
Thirdly, the ethics of sacrifice. The Sarcophagus's ability to sacrifice someone could be used to gain the last drips of ectoplasm needed to charge the warp drive before the radstorm hits, or before a hazard like fire makes the station fully uninhabitable. Finding someone willing to be sacrificed however might be more difficult, and someone who IS willing might just be a worm or worse.
How to spend all of these things is the final conundrum. Who really deserves an extra life. Should ectoplasm even be wasted on that when we need to charge the warp drive? Should I let this person claiming to be a tragedian sacrifice themselves now, or would it be better to wait until we need to execute a prisoner? Regardless of the answers, all of these tools can be devastating to crew in the wrong hands and need to be guarded closely.
