# Snoop

{{#template ../../../templates/unimplemented.md }}

> **Name:** Snoop
>
> **Troupe:** [Crew](../crew.md)
>
> **Archetypes:** Guesser, Psuedo-Oracle
>
> **Description:** Based on the masks you've been assigned, try to identify individuals with those masks.
>
> **Objectives:** Identify a player with X mask.
>
> **Masquerade notes:** N/A
>
> **Modifier notes:** Supports any modifiers.
>
> *A little birdie told me the guzzler would be on this station. So I'm sitting here in the bar. Just waiting...*

## Concept
The Snoop is a crew guesser/oracle who must identify a player who has the mask the Snoop has been assigned for their objective.
It functions as an 'inverted' [Investigator](investigator.md), where instead of determining the mask based on the player, you determine the player based on the mask.

## Abilities
The Snoop is given a mask as well as the number of people on station who have said mask.
Note that this mask is always a crew mask and is excluded from rolling default masks such as the [Crewmember](crewmember.md).

The Snoop has a "guess" action which can be used at any point while they are able to interact.
From here, they can select any player they believe to have the specified mask.
They are not informed as to the veracity of their guess until the end of the round, upon which a successful guess causes the specified player to fail all their objectives with an additional line indicating why.

## Gameplay
The Snoop engages a lot of the same high-level threats as other guessers like the investigator.
By providing a general disincentive in revealing your mask, players are forced to be more discrete in how they operate.
Potential [jealous](../modifiers/jealous.md) players may wish to collaborate with the Snoop, given that they are able to easily foil objectives which may otherwise be impossible successes.

The mask itself reverses the typical framework of deduction by allowing the Snoop to leverage sandbox elements to entrap others.
By creating situations that other masks would want to respond to, there's an extra level of chaos that's organically generated by the motivation to catch someone.
